                                                    UNIT-1  
 
Introduction to Value Education  
In a sense, value education deals with what is universally valuable to all of us, what is 
conducive to our individual and collective happiness and prosperity in a sustainable 
way.  
It enables us to be in harmony with ourselves, with other human beings, and with the 
rest of nature at large. Such an understanding will be vital for the successful conduct of 
our profession as well.  
 
Right Understanding, Relationship, and Physical Facility  
The right understanding will enable us to work out our requirements for physical 
facilities and hence correctly distinguish the difference between wealth and prosperity. 
With nature as well, we need to understand the harmony in nature and how we can 
complement this harmony.  
Right Understanding  
↓ 
 
 
 Relationship→ Happiness with Human Beings  
 
 
Physical Facilities → Mutual Prosperity with rest of Nature  
Thus, we can say that when we use right understanding with relationships, it gives us 
mutual fulfillment because if we have right understanding, then we can be happy in 
ourselves and work to have fulfilling relationships with humans and mutual prosperity 
with nature.  
If we do not have the right understanding, then we have problems. Thus, our happiness 
depends on the fulfillment of these three basic requirements:  
Right understanding + Relationship = Mutual fulfillment  
Right understanding + Physical Facilities = Mutual prosperit  
 
Basic Aspirations  
Our basic aspirations are happiness and prosperity.  
Happiness is ensured by the relationships with other human beings, and prosperity is 
ensured by working on physical facilities.  
Relationship  
Refers to the interpersonal relationships that a person builds in his/her life – at home, at 
workplace, and in society.  
Physical Facilities  
Includes the physiological needs of individuals and indicates the necessities as well as 
the comforts of life.  
It means the feeling of having or being able to have more physical facilities than needed.  
In the present world, we are unable to have fulfilling relationships all the time – in family, 
outside family, and as a society, in the world at large.  
For example: If there is a problem in a relationship, we feel uneasy; it bothers us. Even if 
we are interacting with someone and something we said or did offended them, it makes 
us uneasy, i.e., we want mutual fulfillment in relationship.  
Similarly, we want to feel prosperous, but end up working only for accumulation of 
wealth. We want to enrich nature, but are exploiting it, destroying it. But our natural 
acceptance is that we want to live in harmony with nature.Reason Behind Problems  
The reason behind these problems is that we have to focus on one more aspect – right 
understanding.  
“Right Understanding refers to higher -order human skills – the need to learn and utilize 
our intelligence most effectively.”  
Understanding Value Education  
All of us consider something or the other to be valuable. We set our goals, our aims on 
this basis, and then set out to work towards achieving them.  
Let us look at the following aspects to appreciate.  
Need for Value Education  
Correct identification of our aspirations.  
Understanding universal human values to fulfill our aspirations in continuity.  
Complementarity of values and skills.  
Evaluation of our beliefs.  
Technology and Human Values.  
Scope of Study  
Any course on value education must include:  
All dimensions – thought, behavior, work, and realization.  
All levels of human living – Individual, Family, Society, Nature/existence of human living.  
Content of Value Education  
To understand myself, my aspirations, my happiness.  
To understand the goal of human life.  
To understand the other entities in nature, their interconnectedness and co -existence, 
and the role of human being in nature.  
To understand harmony at the four levels of human living.  
Basic Guidelines for Value Education  
(1) Universal  
It needs to be applicable to all human beings, irrespective of caste, creed, nationality, 
religion, etc., and for all times and regions.  
(2) Rational  
It has to appeal to human reasoning.  
It should be amenable to reasoning and not based on dogmas or blind beliefs.  
(3) Natural and Verifiable  
It has to be naturally acceptable to the human being who goes through the course.  
When we live on the basis of such values, it leads to our happiness.  
It needs to be experientially verifiable, and not based on dogmas, beliefs, or 
assumptions.  
 (4) All Encompassing  
Value Education is aimed at transforming our consciousness and living.  
Hence, it needs to cover all dimensions (thought, behavior, work, and realization) and 
all levels (individual, family, society, nature, and existence) of human life and 
profession.  
(5) Leading to Harmony  
Value Education ultimately is targeted to promote harmony:  
Within the individual  
Among human beings  
With nature  
Process of Value Education  
Value Education begins with Self -Exploration, i.e., looking inside yourself.  
Self-Exploration  
Self-Exploration is the process to find out what is valuable to me by investigating within 
myself.  
             Self-Exploration  
            /                \ 
      What am I?       What I really want to be?  
 
Human Being and Nature/Existence  
Human Being < ---- Participation ---->  Nature / Existence  
                                             (All that exists)  
                                       -> Humans, animals, plants, soil, etc.  
 
Purpose of Self -Exploration  
  1. It is a process of dialogue between:  
    a. “What you are” and “What you really want to be”.  
   2 .It is a process of self -evolution through self -investigation.  
    3. It is a process of knowing oneself and through that, knowing the entire existence.  
     4. It is a process of recognizing one’s relationship with every unit in existence and 
fulfilling it.  
   5.  It is a process of knowing human conduct, human character and living accordingly.  
    6. It is a process of being in harmony in oneself and in harmony with entire existence.  
     7. It is a process of identifying our innateness (Swatva) and moving towards self -
organization (Swatantrata) and self -expression (Swarajya).  
Content of Self -Exploration  
Desire: What is my basic aspiration?  
Program:  What is the process to fulfil the basic aspiration?  
"This is what any human being would like to know and work towards its actualization in 
life."  
And if you have the answers to these two questions, is there any other question that 
remains to be answered?  
Note  
We are going to observe and explore ourselves —what we do, why we do it, and how we 
do it.  
We will study what human beings want, we will study what we really want.  
We want to explore into what is valuable for us.  
Natural Acceptance  
Natural Acceptance means what is naturally acceptable to humans without any 
hesitation or objection, or which is one’s innate ability to determine what is right or 
wrong for themselves without external conditioning or influences.  
Key Points  
 1.Natural Acceptance does not change with time.  
  2.It does not depend on the place.  
   3.It does not depend on our beliefs or past conditioning.  
    4.It is the same for all of us.  
Result of Natural Acceptance  
Once we are in Natural Acceptance, we ultimately self -explore ourselves in terms of 
Realization and Understanding.  
Results we get when we are on realization and understanding  
  1.Assuring:  
“I am assured of the answers or understanding in myself.”  
  2.Satisfying:  
“I am satisfied that the answers are fulfilling for me.”  
3.Universal:  
“I know or realize that the answers I have got are the same for everyone.”  
They are invariant with respect to:  
Time – These answers are the same at all times: past, present, and future.  
Space – These answers are the same at all places or locations.  
Individual – The answers are the same for every human being.  
Note:  
If the answers we get do not fulfill any of the criteria, you need to re -verify the answer.  
 Continuous Happiness and Prosperity – The Basic Human Aspirations  
Continuous Happiness  
Being in harmony within oneself.  
Being in harmony with others.  
Being in harmony with nature.  
Prosperity  
The feeling of having or producing more than required physical facilities.  
Exploring Happiness and Prosperity  
Happiness  
Try to recollect situations when you feel happy.  
You will see that there is a set of feelings which you are able to accept effortlessly and 
naturally  
Examples of Feelings  
1.Trust  
2.Respect  
3.Being confident about your future  
4.These feelings are naturally and effortlessly acceptable to each one of us, and we also 
desire them to continue in ourselves.  
Understanding Happiness  
We can thus understand happiness as:  
“The state/situation in which I live, if there is harmony or synergy in it, then I like to be in 
that state or situation.”  
Quotes:  
1.“To be in a state of liking is Happiness.”  
2.“To be in a state of disharmony or contradiction is Unhappiness.”  
Consequences of the Current Trend (Prevailing Notions)  
At the level of the individual  
1.Rising problems of:  
Depression  
Psychological disorders  
Suicides  
Stress  
Insecurity  
Psycho-somatic diseases  
Loneliness  
At the level of the family  
1.Breaking of joint families  
2.Mistrust and conflict between older and younger generations  
3.Insecurity in relationships  
4.Divorce and dowry tortures  
5.Family feuds  
6.Wasteful expenditure in family functions  
At the level of society  
1.Growing incidence of terrorism and nationalism  
2.Rising communalism and spreading casteism  
3.Racial and ethnic struggle  
4.Wars between nations  
5.Fear of nuclear and genetic warfare  
At the level of nature  
1.Global warming  
2.Waste, soil, and noise pollution  
3.Resource depletion of minerals and mineral oil  
4.Sizeable deforestation  
5.Loss of fertility of soil  
 Happiness and Prosperity – Current Scenario  
1.Happiness = Harmony  
2.Unhappiness = Disharmony  
Every human being aspires for continuous happiness  
1.The program for it depends on whatever he/she has understood or assumed about it.  
Example: big house, lots of money, tasty food, loud music, fast car, attention, name, 
fame, etc.  
2.People keep shifting from one program to another when the program is not 
successful.  
Example: Not getting attention of spouse → shift to watching TV, adding tasty food, 
smoking, drinking, indulgence, renunciati on. 
 Method to Fulfill the Basic Human Aspirations Basic Requirements for Fulfilment of 
Human Aspirations  
List of Wants  
Note down your list of wants first.  
Underline the items that are to do with something physical.   
For Animals  
Animals need physical things to survive and mainly to take care of their body.  
For Human  
1.We have endless relaxations (e.g., reading a book, going to college, watching TV, 
spending time with friends, etc.).  
2.Our needs are more than just physical facilities; we need physical facilities, but the 
need does not end there.  
What is the Solution? – Need for Right Understanding  
“As long as we live with wrong assumptions, we shall continue to have the problems in 
ourselves and have problems in relationships, not feel happy or prosperous, and will 
exploit nature.”  
 
 
Steps to Solve  
1.In order to resolve the issues in human relationships, we need to understand them 
first, and this would come from right understanding of relationships.  
2.Understand and live in harmony at all levels of living.  
Levels of Our Living  
To find out what this right understanding is, we need to:  
Find out the various situations or states we live in and on which our happiness depends.  
Four Levels:  
1.Living in myself  
2.Living in family  
3.Living in society  
4.Living in nature/existence  
                                                            
                                                    UNIT-2 
 
Understanding Human being as the Co -existence of the self and the body  
Now we will explore into the activities of the Self and see how harmony can be ensured 
among all the activities of the Self, resulting into a state of continuous happiness.  
Activities of the Self  
The activities of the Self can be seen in terms of desire, thought and expectation.  
Desire is the name given to the activity of imaging. You are making an image in the Self. 
Desire is in the form of an image which you have created within. Thought is the power for 
the activity of analysing based on comparing various possibilities to fulfil  your desire. 
Expectation is the power for the activity of selecting based on tasting.  
Activities of the Self are Continuous  
These powers of desire, thought and expectation are inexhaustible, and the activities 
are continuous.  The activities of imaging, analysing, comparing and selecting tasting 
are always going on, whether we  are aware of them or not.  These Activities Togeth er 
Constitute Imagination . 
These activities are together called imagination. We may not immediately be able to 
observe our desire, thought and expectation distinctly, but it may be easier to see that 
something is going on within. One imagination or the other is going on in us all th e time.  
Happiness and unhappiness depend on the state of imagination. If your imagination is 
in harmony with your natural acceptance, you are in a state of happiness. When it is in 
contradiction with your natural acceptance, you are in a state of unhappiness.  
Imagination is expressed to the world outside, in terms of behaviour with human being 
and work with the rest of nature.  
We have also referred to imagination as “what I am” and the natural acceptance as 
“what I really want to be”.  
State of Imagination  
Once you start looking at your imagination, you will be able to find out the state of your 
imagination. Your imagination could be well organised, in harmony or it could be a 
random mixture of harmony and contradiction.  
Possible Sources of Imagination  
There are three possible sources of motivation for imagination: 1. Preconditioning, 2. 
Sensation and 3. Natural Acceptance  
A dominant source of imagination is preconditioning. Preconditioning means the 
beliefs, notions,  
Norms, ideas, views, dictums, goals, etc.  Prevailing in the family, in the society which 
we have assumed without knowing. They may influence our imagination.  Another major 
source of our desire, our imagination is the sensation. Sensation is the informati on we  
get from the Body through the five sense organs –  of sound, touch, sight, taste and 
smell.  
Understanding Human Being as the Co -existence of the Self and the Body  
Definition of Human Being  
A human being is understood as a co -existence of two distinct entities:  
1.Self (I) – The conscious entity.  
2.Body – The physical, material entity.  
Characteristics of Self (I)  
1.Nature:  Non-material, conscious, and continuous.  
2.Activities:  Desiring, thinking, and selecting.  
3.Needs:  Happiness, respect, trust, love, knowledge.  
Example:  Feeling happy after helping someone is related to Self, not the body.  
Characteristics of the Body  
1.Nature:  Material and physical.  
2.Activities:  Eating, sleeping, walking, working.  
3.Needs:  Food, clothing, shelter, medicines.  
Example:  Feeling hungry and eating food satisfies Body needs.  
Key Point  
1.The Self uses the Body as an instrument.  
2.If the body is unhealthy, it affects the self’s comfort (e.g., illness causes discomfort 
but happiness depends on self’s mental state).  
Distinguishing between the Needs of the Self and the Body  
Needs of the Self (I)  
1.Qualitative in Nature:  Happiness, respect, trust, love, knowledge.  
2.Unlimited:  We always seek more happiness and satisfaction.  
3.Fulfillment:  Through right understanding and relationships.  
Examples:  
Wanting respect (mental satisfaction).  
Feeling trust in relationships.  
Needs of the Body  
1.Quantitative in Nature:  Food, water, shelter, clothing, medicines.  
2.Limited:  Once satisfied, the need ends temporarily (e.g., after eating food, hunger 
ends).  
3.Fulfillment:  Through physical facilities.  
Examples:  
Eating when hungry.  
Wearing clothes for protection.  
Confusion in Human Living  
1.Often, people try to fulfill Self needs through physical accumulation (e.g., buying 
expensive clothes to gain respect).  
2.This leads to stress and dissatisfaction.  
Distinguishing between the Needs of the Self and the Body  
A human being is a combination of two parts:  
1.Self (I) – The conscious entity (thoughts, feelings, understanding, values).  
2.Body – The physical, material part (biological structure).  
Both have different types of needs, and it is important to understand them separately.  
2. Needs of the Self  
Definition  
The needs of the Self are non -physical and qualitative.  
They are mainly related to our thoughts, emotions, and understanding.  
Examples of Needs of the Self  
1.Happiness:  We all want to be happy always.  
2.Respect:  We want others to respect us, and we also want to respect others.  
3.Trust & Care:  We want trustworthy relationships.  
4.Knowledge & Understanding:  We want to learn and know what is right.  
Key Points  
1.These needs are unlimited because we always want to grow in understanding, love, 
respect, etc.  
2.They cannot be fulfilled by physical items alone.  
3.They are satisfied through values and relationships.  
 
Example:  
Even if someone has a big house and money but has no trustworthy friends or family 
relationships, they may still feel lonely and unhappy.  
3. Needs of the Body  
Definition  
The needs of the Body are physical and quantitative. They are related to keeping the 
body healthy and comfortable.  
Examples of Needs of the Body  
1.Food & Water:  To maintain health and energy.  
2.Clothing & Shelter:  To protect from weather and provide comfort.  
3.Medicine & Exercise:  To keep the body fit and disease -free.  
Key Points  
These needs are limited – after eating enough food, hunger goes away temporarily.  
These are fulfilled using physical facilities (food, clothing, house, etc.).  
Example:  
Eating food (body need) gives energy, but it does not give happiness unless the person 
also has respect and trust (self needs) in life.  
4. Common Confusion  
Many times, people mix these needs:  
1.They try to fulfill Self needs using physical things (e.g., buying costly clothes to get 
respect).  
2.This creates stress and dissatisfaction because Self needs (like respect and trust) can 
only be fulfilled by right understanding and relationships.  
5. Why is this Distinction Important?  
1.Helps set right priorities: first focus on Self (values, relationships, mental peace), then 
Body.  
2.Leads to holistic living – caring for both physical health and emotional/spiritual well -
being.  
3.Happiness, respect, trust, love, knowledge → Qualitative & Unlimited → Fulfilled by 
values and relationships.  
4.Body Needs: Food, clothing, shelter, medicine → Quantitative & Limited → Fulfilled by 
physical facilities.  
5.Understanding this difference helps us live a balanced and harmonious life.  
The Body as an Instrument of the Self  
1. Introduction  
A human being is a combination of:  
1.Self (I) – The conscious entity (thoughts, feelings, understanding).  
2.Body – The physical entity (biological structure).  
Key Concept  
The Body is an instrument of the Self.  
1.The Self uses the Body to interact with the outside world.  
2.Without the Self, the Body is inactive (like a machine without an operator).  
2. Evidence That Body is an Instrument  
1.Decision -Making:  
We decide (Self) → Body acts.  
Example: We decide to drink water → Body moves to drink water.  
2.Awareness:  
The Self is aware of pain, pleasure, emotions, and sensations.  
Example: If the Body is injured, the Self feels pain.  
3.Control:  
The Self can control the Body with discipline (exercise, diet, rest).  
Example: Choosing not to eat junk food despite craving.  
3. Needs of Body vs Needs of Self (Link to Previous Lecture)  
1.Body needs: food, clothing, shelter, health.  
2.Self needs: happiness, respect, trust, knowledge.  
Body → temporary & physical.  
Self → continuous & qualitative.  
4. Importance of Caring for the Body  
Since the Body is an instrument, it must be kept healthy and functional:  
Proper food and rest.  
Exercise.  
Cleanliness and safety.  
Example: A person with poor health cannot focus on studies or relationships effectively.  
5. Summary  
1.The Body is only a means; the Self is the controller.  
2.Taking care of the Body is essential but only to serve the purpose of the Self (achieving 
happiness and values).  
Understanding Harmony in the Self  
1. What is Harmony in the Self?  
Harmony in the Self means having clarity and alignment in our:  
Desires (what we want)  
Thoughts (what we think)  
Actions (what we do)  
When desires, thoughts, and actions are in agreement → Harmony.  
When they are not aligned → Conflict & stress.   
2. Example of Disharmony  
Desire: I want to stay healthy.  
Thought: I should avoid junk food.  
Action: Still eats junk food regularly.  
→ Leads to 3guilt and stress.  
How to Achieve Harmony?  
1.Self-Exploration:  
Asking: “What do I really want?”  
2.Setting Right Priorities:  
Focus on long -term happiness, not just short -term pleasures.  
3.Living by Values:  
Trust, respect, care, and responsibility bring inner peace.  
4. Benefits of Harmony in the Self  
Inner peace and happiness.  
Clear decision -making.  
Better relationships and social interactions.  
Focus on growth (knowledge, skills, values).  
5. Summary  
Harmony in the Self = No conflict between what we want, think, and do.  
Achieved by understanding our true needs, following values, and aligning daily actions 
accordingly.  
Harmony of the Self with the Body  
1. Introduction  
Human being = Self (conscious) + Body (physical).  
Harmony means the Self and Body work together without conflict.  
The Self governs the Body, and the Body is an instrument of the Self.  
2. Signs of Disharmony  
The Self neglects the Body:  
Poor diet, irregular sleep, lack of exercise.  
Over-attachment to the Body:  
Too much focus on appearance, comfort, luxury, leading to stress.  
Example: Choosing unhealthy food or substance abuse despite knowing the harm.  
3. Steps to Ensure Harmony  
A. Take Care of the Body  
1.Provide food, clothing, and shelter appropriately.  
2.Maintain hygiene, rest, and exercise.  
 
 
3.Avoid harmful practices (smoking, drinking, drugs).  
B. Use the Body as an Instrument  
Keep the Body fit to perform tasks chosen by the Self:  
Learning, working, caring for family, and contributing to society.  
C. Balance Self Needs & Body Needs  
Self needs (happiness, respect) → fulfilled by values and relationships.  
Body needs (health, comfort) → fulfilled by physical facilities.  
Example: Eating nutritious food for health rather than overeating for pleasure.  
Example 1: Sleep Discipline  
Disharmony:  Staying awake late at night playing online games → poor health, irritation 
next day.  
Harmony:  Self decides to maintain a healthy sleep schedule → body is well -rested and 
productive.  
Example 2: Eating Habits  
Disharmony:  Eating junk food daily for taste (self ignoring body health).  
Harmony:  Choosing balanced food like fruits, vegetables, and water → healthy body and 
clear mind.  
Example 3: Exercise  
Disharmony:  Avoiding exercise due to laziness (self decision wrong) → obesity and 
health issues.  
Harmony:  Daily morning walk or yoga → healthy body to achieve self’s goals (study, 
work, creativity).  
4. Benefits of Harmony  
1.Better physical health and fitness.  
2.Mental peace and emotional stability.  
3.More productive and meaningful life  
Programme to Ensure Self -Regulation and Health  
 
1. What is Self -Regulation?  
Definition:  The ability of the Self to control desires, emotions, and actions in line with 
values and long -term well -being.  
It means self -discipline and responsible behavior.  
 
2. Why is Self -Regulation Important?  
1.Prevents harmful habits (e.g., addiction, laziness).  
2.Helps maintain harmony between the Self and the Body.  
3.Leads to healthy relationships and stress -free living.  
3. Programme for Self -Regulation  
A. Physical Health  
Regular Exercise:  Yoga, walking, sports.  
Balanced Diet:  Nutritious food, adequate hydration.  
Adequate Rest:  Proper sleep schedule.  
Avoid Harmful Substances:  Tobacco, alcohol, drugs.  
B. Mental Health  
Meditation and Mindfulness: Improves concentration and emotional balance.  
Positive Thinking & Self -Reflection: Helps correct wrong assumptions and improve 
clarity.  
Time Management: Prioritize tasks to reduce stress.  
C. Value-Based Living  
Honesty, Responsibility, Respect: Build trust and harmony in relationships.  
Service Orientation: Engage in helping others, which increases satisfaction.  
A. Physical Health Examples  
1.Regular Exercise:  
Example – Doing 30 min yoga daily reduces stress and keeps the body flexible.  
2.Balanced Diet:  
Example – Replacing sugary soft drinks with water and fresh juice keeps energy levels 
stable.  
3.Avoid Harmful Substances:  
Example – Saying no to cigarettes despite peer pressure → saves health and money.  
B. Mental Health Examples  
Meditation:  
Example – 10 minutes of morning meditation increases focus before exams.  
Time Management:  
Example – Making a daily timetable prevents last -minute stress before project 
submission.  
Positive Thinking:  
Example – Instead of blaming failure, identifying mistakes and improving skills.  
C. Value-Based Living Examples  
Honesty:  
Example – Returning extra change received from a shopkeeper builds trust and self -
respect.  
Respect & Responsibility:  
Example – Helping a classmate who is weak in studies rather than making fun of them.  
Service Orientation:  
Example – Participating in a tree plantation drive for the community.  
4. Expected Outcomes  
Healthy body and peaceful mind.  
Increased confidence and focus.  
Ability to handle challenges without losing balance.  
5. Summary  
Harmony of Self with Body is achieved by understanding their distinct needs and taking 
proper care of the Body as an instrument of the Self.  
A programme of self -regulation and health ensures physical fitness, mental stability, 
and value -based living.  
Quick Classroom Activity Example     
Task: Ask students to write one action they will take for self -regulation (e.g., drinking 2 
liters of water daily, 15 min meditation, avoiding junk food for one week) and discuss 
their experiences next class.  
 
